BIP3: Updated BIP Process (#1712)
bitcoin/bips: bip-update-process.md

that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned to the BIP Editor role, and delineates the
BIP Types more expediently.

## Fundamentals

### What is a BIP?

BIPs cover the range of interests of the bitcoin community. The main topic is technology that supports the bitcoin
currency. Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard.
Some BIPs describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g.
[BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki)), or other information relevant to the bitcoin community. However, any topics related to
the bitcoin protocol, bitcoin’s peer-to-peer network, and bitcoin client software may be acceptable.

BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

### BIP Ownership

Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors and represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are

> expected to foster discussion, address feedback and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of

Reviewer: To what degree do we want the BIP PR request to be the place where discussion about a BIP happens vs the mailinglist? Is it appropriate to suggest alternative designs in the PR comments?

Author: I am not sure that there is a clear line here. I’d say conceptual review and approach discussion should happen preferably in response to the initial presentation of the new idea, but it may still be on-topic in the pull request. If it requires a complete overhaul, it may be better to bring it to the mailing list, as an alternate design that requires a complete rewrite might not be actionable in the context of a pull request.

Do you think there is something missing here that should be clarified? Do you have a concrete suggestion?

Reviewer: You answered my question. I wasn't sure if this BIP was attempting provide a concrete position of type of feedback. That had been the case I would've recommend stating what is allowed more explicitly. However given that it is isn't the case, it is reasonable as written.

their proposal within the bitcoin community.

#### Authors and Shepherds

Authors may want additional support with the BIP process after writing an initial draft. In that case, they may assign

> one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand-in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the

Reviewer 2: The distinction can make a difference when it comes to copyright. I agree that a single role is simpler in terms of the process, but I believe this is what is implemented here. We have effectively a single Owner *role* (and the Owners are the union of Authors and Shepherds), but additionally an author *field* (which is pure metadata and doesn't have implications for the process). 

Now, I agree that this is a bit difficult to explain... 

Perhaps there should just be two required fields "Owners" and "Authors". This sounds like overkill because it leads to duplication. But if you think about it, I believe it's simpler than the current draft:  it avoids the term Shepherd entirely, and in the text, you can easily pick the appropriate term on a case-by-case basis.

Moreover, there may be an author who is not an owner (anymore). Not sure if we'll ever need this, but there's no good reason to exclude it upfront.

> one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand-in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the

Author: I added the additional role per the request of several reviewers. I don’t have strong feelings about this part: I would be happy with just "Owners" or "Authors", I can also live with two roles. It seems to me that people might still be discovering their positions on this aspect, so if anyone has strong feelings, please feel free to discuss further, but I’m gonna give this discussion some time to develop before making additional changes.

> one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand-in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the

Reviewer 3: I agree that a single role is simpler and would suggest a single Authors field.

document. They support the authors in advancing the proposal, or act as point-of-contact for the BIP in absence of the

> authors. A shepherds may perform the role of an Author for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
authors. A Shepherd may perform the role of an Author for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.
```
I'm suggesting "a Shepherd" so it matches the plurality of "an Author".

> authors. A shepherds may perform the role of an Author for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.

Reviewer 5: sounds good to me.

> authors. A shepherds may perform the role of an Author for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.

Author: Great, thanks

Shepherds share ownership of the BIP at the discretion of the Authors.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP authors to the bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more bitcoin clients or other related
software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

### What is the purpose of the BIP repository?

The [BIP repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/) serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals.
Through its high visibility, it facilitates the community-wide consideration of BIPs and provides a well-established

> source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository records all changes to each BIP transparently and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and
```

> allows any community member to easily retain a complete copy of the archive.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
allows any community member to retain a complete copy of the archive easily.
```

The BIP repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond
providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to the audience.

### What is the scope of the BIP repository?

The BIP repository is focused on information and technologies that aim to support and expand the utility of the bitcoin

> currency. Related topics that are of interest to the bitcoin community may be acceptable. The scope of the BIP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
currency. Related topics that interest the bitcoin community may be acceptable. The scope of the BIP
```

repository is limited to BIPs that do not oppose the fundamental principle that bitcoin constitutes a peer-to-peer
electronic cash system for the bitcoin currency.

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

> BIPs should be written in mediawiki or markdown[^markdown] format.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
BIPs should be written in MediaWiki or markdown[^markdown] format.
```

following list and address each as appropriate. For some BIPs, some concerns may not warrant a dedicated section.

* Preamble -- Headers containing metadata about the BIP (see the section [BIP header preamble](#bip-header-preamble)
  below).
* Abstract -- A short description of the technical issue being addressed.
* Motivation -- The motivation is critical for BIPs. It should clearly explain what issue the BIP addresses, and how the
  existing situation is inadequate to address the problem that the BIP solves.
* Specification -- The technical specification should describe the syntax and semantics of any new feature. The
  specification should be detailed enough to enable any bitcoin project to create an interoperable implementation.
* Rationale -- The rationale fleshes out the specification by describing what motivated the design and why particular
  design decisions were made. It should describe related work and alternate designs that were considered. The rationale
  should record relevant objections or important concerns that were raised and addressed as this proposal was developed.

> * Backward compatibility -- A section describing any backwards incompatibilities, their severity, and instructions how

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Backward compatibility -- A section describing any backward incompatibilities, their severity, and instructions on how
```

* Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors, and documentation must be
  finished before the BIP can be given the status "Complete". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or
  as auxiliary files (see [Auxiliary Files](#auxiliary-files)).
* Changelog -- A section to track modifications to a BIP after reaching Complete status.
* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license (see [BIP Licensing](#bip-licensing) below).

#### BIP header preamble

Each BIP must begin with an [RFC 822-style header preamble](https://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc822/). The headers must
appear in the following order. Headers marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required. The overview is
followed by an explanation for each header.

```
  BIP: <BIP number, or "?" before assignment>
* Layer: <Consensus (soft fork) | Consensus (hard fork) | Peer Services | API/RPC | Applications>
  Title: <BIP title (≤ 50 characters)>
  Authors: <Authors’ names and email addresses>
* Shepherds: <Shepherds’ names and email addresses>
  Status: <Draft | Complete | Deployed | Closed>
  Type: <Specification | Informational | Process>

>   Created: <Date of number assignment (yyyy-mm-dd)>

Reviewer 6: Perhaps should also say 'or "?" before assignment' as otherwise I think people will just put whatever date they began writing the document (this is typically what I do).

  License: <Identifier(s) of acceptable license(s)>
* License-Code: <Identifier(s) for Code under different acceptable license(s)>
* Discussion: <Mailing list thread(s), or other noteworthy discussion(s) in "date: URL" format>
* Revision: <Version number (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH)>
* Requires: <BIP number(s)>
* Replaces: <BIP number>
* Superseded-By: <BIP number>
```

__BIP__: The BIP number, or "?" before a number was assigned. A proposal must not self-assign a BIP number. Numbers are
assigned solely by BIP Editors.

__Layer__: The layer of bitcoin the BIP applies to. See [BIP 123](bip-0123.mediawiki) for definitions of the various BIP
layers.

__Title__: A descriptive title of up to 50 characters.

__Authors__: The authors header lists the names (or pseudonyms) and email addresses of all authors of the BIP. The
format of each authors header value must be

    Random J. User <address@dom.ain>

If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC

> 2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions.

Reviewer 6: AFAICT RFC 2822 doesn't specify "continuation line conventions" with that phrasing. The word "continuation" only appears once in a footnote. Perhaps it should refer to the [Long Header Fields](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2822#section-2.2.3) section? Otherwise, it's not entirely clear what the convention actually is, and whether that section describes the convention.

This sentence appears to be lifted from [PEP 1](https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/), which provides equally vague guidance.

Author: Okay good, I replaced it with 

```diff
-If there are multiple authors, each should be on a separate line following [RFC
-2822](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2822.html) continuation line conventions.
+Multiple authors should be recorded on separate lines:
+
+    Authors: Random J. User <address@dom.ain>
+             Anata Sample <anata@domain.example>
```

> __Shepherds__: The Shepherds header lists additional owners of the BIP. Shepherds stand-in for the original authors of a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
__Shepherds__: The Shepherds header lists additional owners of the BIP. Shepherds stand in for the original authors of a
```

Reviewer 3: Larry is correct here: the verb is "to stand in" without a hyphen. That said, suggest dropping the shepherds.

BIP. The Shepherds header uses the same format as the Authors header. See the [BIP Ownership](#bip-ownership) section
above.

__Status__: The Status header takes one of the four values Draft, Complete, Deployed, and Closed. The
[Workflow](#workflow) section below describes the statuses in detail.

__Type__: The Type header specifies the type of BIP: Specification, Informational, or Process. See the [BIP
types](#bip-types) section below.

__Created__: The Created header records the date that the BIP was assigned a number using ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) format.

__License/License-Code__: The SPDX License Identifier(s) of the acceptable licenses under which this BIP is available.
See the [BIP Licensing](#bip-licensing) section below for a description of the acceptable Licenses and their SPDX
License Identifiers.

If there are multiple licenses, each should be on a separate line.

> __Discussion__: The Discussion header is used to point the audience to relevant discussions of the BIP, e.g. the mailing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
__Discussion__: The Discussion header is used to point the audience to relevant discussions of the BIP, e.g., the mailing
```

list thread in which the idea for the BIP was discussed, a thread where a new version of the BIP was presented, or
relevant discussion threads on other platforms. Entries take the format "yyyy-mm-dd: URL", e.g.
`2009-01-09: https://www.mail-archive.com/cryptography@metzdowd.com/msg10142.html`.

Multiple discussions should be listed on separate lines.

__Revision__: The Revision header indicates the version of this BIP after a Changelog section has been added. The value
is provided as MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH, e.g. `Revision: 2.3.1`.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header to indicate existing BIPs the new proposal depends on. If multiple BIPs
are required, they should be listed in one line separated by a comma and space (e.g. "1, 2").

> __Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Replaces header that contains the number of an older BIP it renders

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Replaces header that contains the number of an older BIP that it renders
```

> obsolete. A Superseded-By header indicates in turn that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by the later document with the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
obsolete. A Superseded-By header indicates, in turn, that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by the later document with the
```

  it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation and preferably provide test vectors.
* An **Informational BIP** describes a bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines or other information to the
  bitcoin community.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to topics other than the bitcoin protocol and bitcoin implementations.
  They often require community consensus and are typically binding for the corresponding process. Examples include
  procedures, guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP Process.

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have authors—people who write the BIP,
gather feedback, shepherd the discussion in the appropriate forums, and finally recommend a mature proposal to the
community.

![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

After having an idea, the authors should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in this

> BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects. Small improvements

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
BIP. The idea must interest the broader community or be relevant to multiple software projects. Minor improvements
```

to the bitcoin community, the authors should work on drafting a BIP.

As a first sketch of the proposal is taking shape, the authors should present it to the [Bitcoin Development Mailing
List](https://groups.google.com/g/bitcoindev). This gives the authors a chance to collect initial feedback and address
fundamental concerns. If the authors wish to work in public on the proposal at this stage, it is recommended that they
open a pull request against one of their forks of the BIP repository instead of the main BIP repository.

It is recommended that complicated proposals be split into separate BIPs that each focus on a specific component of the
overall proposal.

### Progression through BIP Statuses

The following sections refer to BIP Status Field values. The BIP Status Field is defined in the Header Preamble
specification above.

#### Draft

After fleshing out the proposal further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the authors
should open a pull request to the [BIP repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The document must adhere to the

> formatting requirements specified below and should be provided as a file named with a working title of the form

Reviewer 6: Formatting requirements are specified above.

ideation phase, e.g. by generating substantial public discussion and commentary from diverse contributors, by
independent bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the authors working for an extended period toward
improving the proposal based on community feedback, will be assigned a number by a BIP editor. The BIP editors should
delay number assignment when they perceive a proposal being met with lack of interest: number assignment facilitates the
distributed discussion of ideas, but before a proposal garners some interest in the bitcoin community, there is no need
to refer to it by a number.

Proposals are also not ready for number assignment if they duplicate efforts, disregard formatting rules, are too
unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backwards compatibility where necessary, or
fail to specify the feature clearly and comprehensively. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the
proposal may be improved to progress toward readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious ideas or

> have stopped to make progress may be closed.

Reviewer 6: "have stopped to make progress" reads weirdly to me. Perhaps "have stopped making progress".

If the BIP needs more work, an editor should ensure that constructive, actionable feedback is provided to the authors
for revision. Once the BIP is ready it should be submitted as a "pull request" to the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) where it may get further feedback.

For each new BIP pull request that comes in, an editor checks the following:

* The idea has been previously discussed on the Bitcoin Development Mailing List
* Title accurately describes the content
* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backward Compatibility have been addressed
* Specification provides sufficient detail for implementation
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is ready: it is comprehensible, technically feasible, and all aspects are addressed as necessary

Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

A BIP editor will:

* Assign a BIP number and BIP type in the pull request
* Merge the pull request when it is ready

> * List the BIP in the [README](README.mediawiki)

Reviewer 6: Updating the README has been done by BIP authors in their PRs to add their BIP. Changing to having the BIP editors do this requires either the BIP editors make another PR or the BIP author allows Editors to modify their PR. I find either option to be undesirable. Also, the former would break CI.

Instead, I think this should be in the list above as something for the editors to check has been done correctly.

The BIP editors are intended to fulfill administrative and editorial responsibilities. The BIP editors monitor BIP
changes, and update BIP headers as appropriate.

BIP editors may also, at their option, unilaterally make and merge strictly editorial changes to BIPs, such as
correcting misspellings, fixing broken links, etc. as long as they do not change the meaning or conflict with the
original intent of the authors. Such a change must be recorded in the Changelog if it’s noteworthy per the criteria
mentioned in the [Changelog](#changelog) section.

## Backward Compatibility

> ### Changes from BIP 2

Reviewer 6: Another change is the definition of the Created header.

    to leave the evaluation of BIPs to the audience.
[^markdown]: **Which flavor of markdown is allowed?**  
    The author of this proposal has no opinion on Markdown flavors, but recommends that proposals stick to the basic
    Markdown syntax features commonly shared across Markdown dialects.
[^living-documents]: **Why are Process BIPs living documents?**  
    In the past years, the existing BIPs process has not always provided a clear approach to all situations. For
    example, the content of BIP 2 appears to have been penned especially with fork proposals in mind. It seems clear
    that bitcoin development will evolve in many surprising ways in the future. Instead of mandating the effort of
    writing a new process document every time new situations arise, it seems preferable to allow the process to adapt to
    the concerns of the future in specific aspects. Therefore, Process BIPs are defined as living documents that remain
    open to amendment. If a Process BIP requires large modifications or even a complete overhaul, a new BIP should be
    preferred.
[^new-BIP]: **Why should the specification of an implemented BIP no longer be changed?**  

>     After a Complete or Deployed BIP have been deployed by one or more implementations, breaking changes to the

Reviewer 6: s/have/has

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process
Created: ?
License: BSD-2-Clause
Post-History: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
              https://gnusha.org/pi/bitcoindev/59fa94cea6f70e02b1ce0da07ae230670730171c.camel@timruffing.de/#t
Requires: 123
Replaces: 2
```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces [BIP 2](bip-0002.mediawiki) with a streamlined process, and may be amended to
address the evolving needs of the BIP process.

## Motivation

BIP 2 is over eight years old and was written when different concerns were pressing to the Bitcoin[^capitalization]
community. The BIP process as defined by BIP 2 aimed to facilitate the design and
activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs have more often described interoperational standards beyond the base
protocol. The community has debated repeatedly about the role of the BIP Editors, and aspects of the process

> specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goals. This BIP sunsets aspects of the BIP 2 process

Reviewer 3: Suggest keeping only the last sentence of this paragraph.

Also, as mentioned in https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1712#discussion_r1889257750, we are still seeing quite a few new BIPs for protocol changes.

that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned to the BIP Editor role, and delineates the
BIP Types more clearly.

## Fundamentals

### What is a BIP?

BIPs cover the range of interests of the Bitcoin community. The main topic is information and technologies that support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency. Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard.
Some BIPs describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g.,
[BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki)), or other information relevant to the Bitcoin community. However, any topics related to
the Bitcoin protocol, peer-to-peer network, and client software may be acceptable.

> BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
> documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

Author: Okay, I replaced it with "a means":

```suggestion
BIPs are intended to be a means for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.
```

Shepherds share ownership of the BIP at the discretion of the Authors.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what Bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP authors to the Bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more Bitcoin clients or other related
software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the Bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

### What is the purpose of the BIP repository?

The [BIP repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/) serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals.
Through its high visibility, it facilitates the community-wide consideration of BIPs and provides a well-established
source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and
allows any community member to retain a complete copy of the archive easily.

The BIP repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond

> providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to the audience.

Reviewer 7: I would enjoy a stronger statement here to remind unfamiliar readers that there is no organization formal or otherwise that guides bitcoin through improvement proposals or improvement deployments/implementations. Uninitiated readers may not be familiar with these more arcane matters of bitcoin development.

  should record relevant objections or important concerns that were raised and addressed as this proposal was developed.
* Backward compatibility -- A section describing any backward incompatibilities, their severity, and instructions on how
  implementers/users should deal with these incompatibilities.
* Reference implementation -- Where applicable, a reference implementation, test vectors, and documentation must be
  finished before the BIP can be given the status "Complete". Any or all of these can be provided either in the BIP or
  as auxiliary files (see [Auxiliary Files](#auxiliary-files)).
* Changelog -- A section to track modifications to a BIP after reaching Complete status.
* Copyright -- The BIP must be placed under an acceptable license (see [BIP Licensing](#bip-licensing) below).

#### BIP header preamble

Each BIP must begin with an [RFC 822-style header preamble](https://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc822/). The headers must
appear in the following order. Headers marked with "\*" are optional. All other headers are required. The overview is
followed by an explanation for each header.

```
  BIP: <BIP number, or "?" before assignment>

> * Layer: <Consensus (soft fork) | Consensus (hard fork) | Peer Services | API/RPC | Applications>

Reviewer 7: Given that this is intended to replace bip2, I wonder if there should be a header indicating which bip rule regime the bip was originally intended for (bip1, bip2, bip-update-process, etc).

  Title: <BIP title (≤ 50 characters)>
  Authors: <Authors’ names and email addresses>
* Shepherds: <Shepherds’ names and email addresses>
  Status: <Draft | Complete | Deployed | Closed>

>   Type: <Specification | Informational | Process>

Reviewer 3: This line replaces "Standards Track" with "Specification".  However, "Specification" is also a section in the list above that is frequently present in BIPs. It would seem both clearer and (much) simpler to leave "Standards Track" unchanged, unless there is a very compelling reason to change it?

Reviewer 3: > I could live with applying a new definition to the existing Standards Track Type, and relabeling existing BIPs

Understood. I think I mildly prefer this to avoid conflating the Specification type with Specification sections.

>   Created: <Date of number assignment, or "?" before assignment>

Reviewer 3: It would be clearer to keep the date format of ISO 8601 (yyyy-mm-dd) as currently specified in BIP2.

  License: <Identifier(s) of acceptable license(s)>
* License-Code: <Identifier(s) for Code under different acceptable license(s)>
* Discussion: <Mailing list thread(s), or other noteworthy discussion(s) in "date: URL" format>

> * Revision: <Version number (MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH)>

Reviewer 3: As the Changelog lists dates/versions/descriptions and follows semver, would call this field "Version" and mention here that it follows semver.

__Requires__: BIPs may have a Requires header to indicate existing BIPs the new proposal depends on. If multiple BIPs
are required, they should be listed in one line separated by a comma and space (e.g., "1, 2").

__Replaces/Superseded-By__: BIPs may have a Replaces header that contains the number of an older BIP that it renders
obsolete. A Superseded-By header indicates, in turn, that a BIP has been rendered obsolete by the later document with the
provided number.

#### Auxiliary files

BIPs may include auxiliary files such as diagrams and source code. Auxiliary files must be included in a subdirectory
for that BIP named `bip-XXXX`, where "XXXX" is the BIP number zero-padded to four digits. File names in the subdirectory
do not need to adhere to a specific convention.

### BIP types

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with
  it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation and preferably provide test vectors.

> * An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines or other information to the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, or provides general guidelines or other information to the
```

  Bitcoin community.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to topics other than the Bitcoin protocol and Bitcoin implementations.
  They often require community consensus and are typically binding for the corresponding process. Examples include
  procedures, guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP Process.

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for Bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have authors—people who write the BIP,
gather feedback, shepherd the discussion in the appropriate forums, and finally recommend a mature proposal to the
community.

![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

### Ideation

After having an idea, the authors should evaluate whether it meets the criteria to become a BIP, as described in this
BIP. The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects. Minor improvements

> and matters concerning only a single project usually do not require standardization and should instead be brought up directly to

Reviewer 3: If I'm not confused, this shouldn't pertain to Process BIPs.

#### Draft

After fleshing out the proposal further and ensuring that it is of high quality and properly formatted, the authors
should open a pull request to the [BIP repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips). The document must adhere to the
formatting requirements specified above and should be provided as a file named with a working title of the form
"bip-title.[md|mediawiki]". The authors must not self-assign a number to their proposal.

BIPs that (1) adhere to the formatting requirements, (2) are on-topic, and (3) have materially progressed beyond the
ideation phase, e.g., by generating substantial public discussion and commentary from diverse contributors, by
independent Bitcoin projects working on adopting the proposal, or by the authors working for an extended period toward
improving the proposal based on community feedback, will be assigned a number by a BIP editor. The BIP editors should
delay number assignment when they perceive a proposal being met with lack of interest: number assignment facilitates the
distributed discussion of ideas, but before a proposal garners some interest in the Bitcoin community, there is no need
to refer to it by a number.

> Proposals are also not ready for number assignment if they duplicate efforts, disregard formatting rules, are too

Reviewer 3: A mention of or reference to the scope of BIPs described lines 45-47 would be helpful in this sentence.

Author: If something is out of scope, it’s offtopic, so it seems unnecessary to additionally mention that it’s not eligible for number assignment.

unfocused or too broad, fail to provide proper motivation, fail to address backward compatibility where necessary, or
fail to specify the feature clearly and comprehensively. Reviewers and BIP editors should provide guidance on how the
proposal may be improved to progress toward readiness. Pull requests that are proposing off-topic or unserious ideas or

> have stopped making progress may be closed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that have stopped making progress may be closed.
```

proposal is said to have rough consensus if it has been open to discussion on the development mailing list for at least
one month, and no person maintains any unaddressed substantiated objections to it. Addressed or obstructive objections
may be ignored/overruled by general agreement that they have been sufficiently addressed, but clear reasoning must be
given in such circumstances. Deployed Process BIPs may be modified indefinitely as long as a proposed modification has
rough consensus per the same criteria.[^living-documents]

#### Closed[^closed]

A BIP that is _not in active use_, may be labeled Closed when its authors have stopped working on it, no longer
recommend the proposed approach, or no longer pursue adoption of their Complete proposal. The reason for moving the
proposal to Closed should be recorded in the Changelog section in the same commit that updates the status.

##### Draft ↦ Closed

BIP authors may decide on their own to change their BIP’s status from Draft to Closed. If a Draft BIP stops making
progress, sees accumulated feedback unaddressed, or otherwise appears stalled for a year, the community may move the BIP

> to Closed unless the authors assert that they intend to continue work when contacted.

Reviewer 3: It may be a good idea to provide a time frame here for considering when authors are non-responsive or no longer reachable.

Reviewer 7: >  It may be a good idea to provide a time frame here for considering when authors are non-responsive or no longer reachable.

Good idea. By committing to a specific timeout here, authors can be informed upfront as to when their efforts will be considered abandoned. This could serve to encourage them to indicate when they will be unreachable, too.

Preamble must indicate the latest version in the Revision header.

### Adoption of proposals

The BIP repository does not track the sentiment on proposals and does not track the adoption of BIPs beyond whether they
are in active use or not. It is not intended for BIPs to list additional implementations beyond the reference
implementation: the BIP repository is not a signpost where to find implementations.[^OtherImplementations] After a BIP
is advanced to Complete, it is up to the Bitcoin community to evaluate, adopt, ignore, or reject a BIP. Individual
Bitcoin projects are encouraged to publish a list of BIPs they implement. A good example of this at the time of writing
this BIP can be observed in Bitcoin Core’s [doc/bips.md](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/blob/master/doc/bips.md)
file.

### Transferring BIP Ownership

It occasionally becomes necessary to transfer ownership of BIPs to new owners. In general, it would be preferable to
retain the original authors of the transferred BIP, but that is up to the original authors. A good reason to transfer
ownership is because the original authors no longer have the time or interest in updating it or following through with

> the BIP process, or have fallen off the face of the 'net (i.e., are unreachable or not responding to email). A bad reason

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the BIP process, or are unreachable or unresponsive. A bad reason
```

to transfer ownership is because someone doesn't agree with the direction of the BIP. The community tries to build
consensus around a BIP, but if that's not possible, rather than fighting over control, the dissenters should supply a
competing BIP.

If someone is interested in assuming ownership of a BIP, they should send an email asking to take over, addressed to the
original authors, the BIP Editors, and the Bitcoin Development Mailing List. If the authors do not respond in a timely
manner (e.g., two weeks), the BIP editors will make a unilateral decision whether to appoint the applicants as

> [Shepherds](#authors-and-shepherds) (which may be amended should the original authors make a delayed reappearance).

Reviewer 3: If the BIP is in draft, a new owner may be an author as well? (It would be simpler to have a single role)

## BIP Licensing

### Specification

Each new BIP must identify at least one acceptable license in its preamble. Licenses must be referenced per their
respective [SPDX License identifier](https://spdx.org/licenses). New BIPs may be accepted with the licenses described
below.

> 

Reviewer 7: One or two sentences about the motivation behind our interest in freely licensed BIPs could be helpful to include.

by authors. Substantive discussion of ideas may be more accessible to a broader audience on the mailing list, where it
is also more likely to be retained by the community memory.

If the BIP needs more work, an editor should ensure that constructive, actionable feedback is provided to the authors
for revision. Once the BIP is ready it should be submitted as a "pull request" to the [BIPs
repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips) where it may get further feedback.

For each new BIP pull request that comes in, an editor checks the following:

* The idea has been previously discussed on the Bitcoin Development Mailing List
* Title accurately describes the content
* Proposal is of general interest and/or pertains to more than one Bitcoin project/implementation
* Document is properly formatted
* Licensing terms are acceptable
* Motivation, Rationale, and Backward Compatibility have been addressed
* Specification provides sufficient detail for implementation
* The defined Layer header must be correctly assigned for the given specification
* The BIP is ready: it is comprehensible, technically feasible, and all aspects are addressed as necessary

> Editors do NOT evaluate whether the proposal is likely to be adopted.

Reviewer 7: "The idea must be of interest to the broader community or relevant to multiple software projects."

```
BIP: ?
Title: Updated BIP Process
Author: Murch <murch@murch.one>
Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-Updated-BIP-Process
Status: Draft
Type: Process

> Created: 2024-05-13

Reviewer 3: Note to replace this date with the day a number is assigned.

License: BSD-2-Clause
Post-History: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2
Requires: 123
Replaces: 2
```

## Abstract

This _Bitcoin Improvement Proposal (BIP)_ provides information about the preparation of BIPs and policies relating to
the publication of BIPs. It replaces [BIP 2](bip-0002.mediawiki) with a streamlined process, and may be amended to
address the evolving needs of the BIP process.

## Motivation

BIP 2 is over eight years old and was written when different concerns were pressing to the Bitcoin[^capitalization]

> community. The BIP process as defined by BIP 2 thus far seems to have been fashioned to facilitate the design and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
community. The BIP process as defined by BIP 2 aimed to facilitate the design and
```

> activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs more often describe interoperable features beyond the base

Reviewer 3: BIPs involving protocol changes are still being proposed, so I'm not sure about this sentence and if it is necessary.

```suggestion
activation of protocol changes. In the past years, BIPs have more often described interoperational standards beyond the base
```

> protocol. The community has had multiple debates about the role of BIP Editors, and some aspects of the process

Reviewer 3: prefer direct over passive voice and other grammar fixups

```suggestion
protocol. The community has debated repeatedly about the role of the BIP Editors and aspects of the process
```

> specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goals. This proposal sunsets aspects of the BIP 2 process

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specified by BIP 2 that did not seem to achieve the intended goals. This BIP sunsets aspects of the BIP 2 process
```

that did not achieve broad adoption, reduces the judgment calls assigned to the BIP Editor role, and delineates the
BIP Types more clearly.

## Fundamentals

### What is a BIP?

BIPs cover the range of interests of the Bitcoin community. The main topic is technology that supports the Bitcoin
currency. Most BIPs provide a concise, self-contained, technical description of one new concept, feature, or standard.
Some BIPs describe processes, implementation guidelines, best practices, incident reports (e.g.
[BIP 50](bip-0050.mediawiki)), or other information relevant to the Bitcoin community. However, any topics related to

> the Bitcoin protocol, Bitcoin’s peer-to-peer network, and Bitcoin client software may be acceptable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the Bitcoin protocol, peer-to-peer network, and client software may be acceptable.
```

BIPs are intended to be the primary mechanism for proposing new protocol features, coordinating client standards, and
documenting design decisions that have gone into implementations. BIPs may be submitted by anyone.

### BIP Ownership

Each BIP is primarily owned by its authors and represents the authors’ opinion or recommendation. The authors are
expected to foster discussion, address feedback and dissenting opinions, and, if applicable, advance the adoption of
their proposal within the Bitcoin community.

#### Authors and Shepherds

Authors may want additional support with the BIP process after writing an initial draft. In that case, they may assign

> one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
one or more Shepherds to their BIP. Shepherds are stand-in owners of a BIP who were not involved in writing the
```

> document. They support the authors in advancing the proposal, or act as point-of-contact for the BIP in absence of the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
document. They support the authors in advancing the proposal, or act as a point of contact for the BIP in the absence of the
```

authors. Shepherds may perform the role of Authors for any aspect of the BIP process unless overruled by an Author.

> Shepherds share ownership of the BIP at the discretion of the Authors.

Reviewer 3: Can an author revoke the shepherds? What if there are several authors?

Not sure if the addition of shepherds is useful.

The notion of herding sheep...heh :)

Reviewer 3: I'd drop it for now in the name of simplicity, which I believe is also a primary goal of this BIP.

### What is the significance of BIPs?

BIPs do not define what Bitcoin is: individual BIPs do not represent Bitcoin community consensus or a general
recommendation for implementation. A BIP represents a personal recommendation by the BIP authors to the Bitcoin
community. Some BIPs may never be adopted. Some BIPs may be adopted by one or more Bitcoin clients or other related
software. Some may even end up changing the consensus rules that the Bitcoin ecosystem jointly enforces.

> ### What is the purpose of the BIP repository?

Reviewer 3: Here and throughout this document.

```suggestion
### What is the purpose of the BIPs repository?
```

Author: I had just changed that the other way per request of @real-or-random here: https://github.com/murchandamus/bips/pull/2#discussion_r1778753665

Author: Thinking more about this, I would say "the Bitcoin Improvement Proposal repository", not "the Bitcoin Improvement Proposal**s** repository", so seems right to me?

Reviewer 3: Per https://github.com/bitcoin/bips, the url and repo are named `bips` and the longer title is "Bitcoin Improvement Proposals". Furthermore, "proposals" in the plural form would be correct here. Thus, the comment stands.

Author: Okay, changed it back to "BIPs repository" throughout

> The [BIP repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/) serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The [BIPs repository](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/) serves as a publication medium and archive for mature proposals.
```

Through its high visibility, it facilitates the community-wide consideration of BIPs and provides a well-established
source to retrieve the latest version of any BIP. The repository transparently records all changes to each BIP and

> allows any community member to retain a complete copy of the archive easily.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
allows any community member to easily retain a complete copy of the archive.
```

Author: Y’all are killing me, @LarryRuane: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/pull/1712#discussion_r1880775956

The BIP repository is not a tool to track acceptance[^acceptance], adoption, or community consensus on BIPs, beyond
providing a brief overview of BIP statuses (see [Workflow](#workflow) below) to the audience.

### What is the scope of the BIP repository?

The BIP repository is focused on information and technologies that aim to support and expand the utility of the bitcoin
currency. Related topics that are of interest to the Bitcoin community may be acceptable. The scope of the BIP
repository is limited to BIPs that do not oppose the fundamental principle that Bitcoin constitutes a peer-to-peer

> electronic cash system for the bitcoin currency.

Reviewer 3: Line 33-42 above also appear to discuss the scope. Suggest a single point of truth in this document that defines the scope of BIPs.

## BIP format and structure

### Specification

> BIPs should be written in MediaWiki or Markdown[^markdown] format.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Authors may choose to submit BIPs in MediaWiki or Markdown[^markdown] format.
```

* A **Specification BIP** defines a set of technical rules affecting the interoperability of implementations. The
  distinguishing feature of a Specification BIP is that it can be implemented, and implementations can be compliant with
  it. Specification BIPs should come with or refer to a reference implementation and preferably provide test vectors.
* An **Informational BIP** describes a Bitcoin design issue, provides general guidelines or other information to the
  Bitcoin community.
* A **Process BIP** describes a process surrounding Bitcoin, or proposes a change to (or an event in) a process. Process
  BIPs are like Specification BIPs, but apply to topics other than the Bitcoin protocol and Bitcoin implementations.
  They often require community consensus and are typically binding for the corresponding process. Examples include
  procedures, guidelines, and changes to decision-making processes such as the BIP Process.

## Workflow

The BIP process starts with a new idea for Bitcoin. Each potential BIP must have authors—people who write the BIP,
gather feedback, shepherd the discussion in the appropriate forums, and finally recommend a mature proposal to the
community.

> ![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

Reviewer: Is there a reason Closed is grey font, grey lines but all the other states are black font, black lines?

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/eaa71bc3-bf24-4694-af73-d8674749b85e)

> ![Status Diagram](bip-update-process/status-diagram.png "Status Diagram for the BIP Workflow")

Author: No strong reasons. I changed it to black.
